---
title: Getting Started On Mastodon
author: Daniel Moch
copyright: 2018, Daniel Moch
date: 2018-10-18T06:29:45-04:00
category: technology
description: Tips for making the most of your experience on the Fediverse
---
If I've identified a trend in my social media preferences, it's that I
prefer not to use social media. That's not to say that I *don't* use it,
just that I often feel conflicted when I do. On the one hand, this is
where my friends are, and online networks have become a sort of
pseudo-public square. (My choice of words there is deliberate ...
"pseudo" as in "fake." I actually don't think online networks work as a
true replacement for a public square, but that's a post for another
time.) Skip out on social media altogether and you basically opt-out of
a lot of opportunities to rub elbows with people, which, despite all of
the good and the bad that entails, I still think is worthwhile.

On the other hand, popular social networks are for-profit companies that
invariably make their money by turning their users into their product,
which is packaged and sold to online advertisers. I don't know about
you, but to me that feels a bit dehumanizing. Sure, that model of
business existed long before social networks did, at least in the
abstract, but let's not kid ourselves---the way we're packaged and sold to
advertisers is far different in the hands of social networks than at any
time in history. Magazines and television networks could guess at the
kinds of readers and viewers they attracted, and companies like Nielson
could even provide some hard data to back up their guesswork, but what
they didn't have was gobs of very personal data from which to draw
conclusions about us. Apart from our reading/viewing habits, older forms
of media had comparatively little to work with.

(As an aside, this is why Google and Facebook are such valuable
companies with such obscenely high market caps. It's not because of the
value they provide to their users. It's because of the value they
provide to advertisers. If what they were doing wasn't such a marked
departure from the way ad targeting was done in the past, then these
companies wouldn't be so financially successful. Don't buy the argument
that what these companies do is the same as magazines and television
networks before them.)

So here's the bind, I can either participate in social media in order to
"stay connected," and deal with the icky feeling of being someone's
product, or I can opt-out and look like an increasingly irrelevant
luddite, telling Facebook and Google to get off his lawn. But here we
are, this is just the deal we're all being given, and there's nothing we
can do about it, right?

Wrong.

Enter Mastodon
==============

What's Mastodon? There are a few perspectives from which to tackle that
question. To wit:

1. Technically speaking, Mastodon is one of a few social media networks
   that participate in what's sometimes referred to as the "Fediverse,"
   which is a term used to describe the common technologies/protocols
   underpinning them. These protocols allow Mastodon and it's sister
   networks to be both decentralized and federated. Taken together, it's
   useful to think of federated, decentralized networks as being like
   email. I might have an email address with Google, but I can use that
   address to send email to anyone at any other email provider.  Loosely
   speaking, multiple providers/operators is what we mean by
   "decentralized;" and the fact that they can all talk to each other is
   what we mean by "federated."

2. To users, Mastodon works a lot like Twitter. You can tweet (which in
   Mastodon is called---rather unfortunately in my opinion---tooting),
   retweet (or boost, in Mastodon parlance), and send "private" messages
   to other users. Toots in Mastodon can be longer than tweets, 500
   characters compared to 280. Hashtags work too.

3. In terms of look-and-feel, the user experience on a typical Mastodon
   server's website reminds me a lot of Tweetdeck. That said, there are
   custom user interfaces available as well (not to mention mobile
   apps).

Because of the above---and particularly because of Mastodon's
decentralized, federated nature---there's a lot to recommend it.

**Did I Mention No Ads?**

Getting Started
===============

I actually started this post because I wanted to have something to send
to folks either asking what Mastodon is or who have just joined and are
a bit confused about next steps. There's a lot already out there, so my
approach with what remains will be to link to other introductions. If I
find another page that fills a gap, I'll update this page with a link.

Without further ado:

1. [Mastodon
FAQ](https://github.com/tootsuite/documentation/blob/master/Using-Mastodon/FAQ.md)
– A more in-depth explainer of what Mastodon is and
   how it works.

2. [Using
Mastodon](https://github.com/tootsuite/documentation#using-mastodon) –
Links to the above FAQ, and list of instances, a
   list of mobile apps, and a user guide

3. [Guide to
Mastodon](https://github.com/joyeusenoelle/GuideToMastodon/) – A more
in-depth user guide and FAQ
